README.md, before:

# nocodb

<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/package=nocodb" class="pkgdown-release"><img src="https://r-pkg.org/badges/version/nocodb" alt="CRAN Status" /></a>

nocodb allows to work with NocoDB’s RESTful APIs from R. NocoDB is a web application that provides an intuitive spreadsheet-like front-end for relational databases, see https://nocodb.com.

## Documentation

[![Netlify Status](https://api.netlify.com/api/v1/badges/8780ea6d-ea71-4ddc-a8fe-be53e095a727/deploy-status)](https://app.netlify.com/sites/nocodb-rpkg-dev/deploys)

The documentation of this package is found [here](https://nocodb.rpkg.dev).

## Installation

To install the latest development version of nocodb, run the following in R:

``` r
if (!("remotes" %in% rownames(installed.packages()))) {
  install.packages(pkgs = "remotes",
                   repos = "https://cloud.r-project.org/")
}

remotes::install_gitlab(repo = "rpkg.dev/nocodb")
```

## Package configuration

Some of nocodb’s functionality is controlled via package-specific global configuration which can either be set via [R options](https://rdrr.io/r/base/options.html) or [environment variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable) (the former take precedence). This configuration includes:

::: table-wide
| **Description**                                                                                                                                                                             | **R option**        | **Environment variable** | **Default value** |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------------|:------------------|
| [Hostname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hostname) of the NocoDB server to work with.                                                                                                       | `nocodb.hostname`   | `R_NOCODB_HOSTNAME`      |                   |
| [API authentication token](https://docs.nocodb.com/account-settings/api-tokens/) of the NocoDB server to work with. A valid API token is required for almost all functions in this package. | `nocodb.api_token`  | `R_NOCODB_API_TOKEN`     |                   |
| Title (name) of the default NocoDB [base](https://docs.nocodb.com/category/bases) to work with.                                                                                             | `nocodb.base_title` | `R_NOCODB_BASE_TITLE`    |                   |
:::

## Development

### R Markdown format

This package’s source code is written in the [R Markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/) file format to facilitate practices commonly referred to as [*literate programming*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming). It allows the actual code to be freely mixed with explanatory and supplementary information in expressive Markdown format instead of having to rely on [`#` comments](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-lang.html#Comments) only.

All the `.gen.R` suffixed R source code found under [`R/`](https://gitlab.com/rpkg.dev/nocodb/-/tree/main/R/) is generated from the respective R Markdown counterparts under [`Rmd/`](https://gitlab.com/rpkg.dev/nocodb/-/tree/main/Rmd/) using [`pkgpurl::purl_rmd()`](https://pkgpurl.rpkg.dev/dev/reference/purl_rmd.html)[^1]. Always make changes only to the `.Rmd` files – never the `.R` files – and then run `pkgpurl::purl_rmd()` to regenerate the R source files.

### Coding style

This package borrows a lot of the [Tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/) design philosophies. The R code adheres to the principles specified in the [Tidyverse Design Guide](https://principles.tidyverse.org/) wherever possible and is formatted according to the [Tidyverse Style Guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/) (TSG) with the following exceptions:

-   Line width is limited to **160 characters**, double the [limit proposed by the TSG](https://style.tidyverse.org/syntax.html#long-lines) (80 characters is ridiculously little given today’s high-resolution wide screen monitors).

    Furthermore, the preferred style for breaking long lines differs. Instead of wrapping directly after an expression’s opening bracket as [suggested by the TSG](https://style.tidyverse.org/syntax.html#long-lines), we prefer two fewer line breaks and indent subsequent lines within the expression by its opening bracket:

    ``` r
    # TSG proposes this
    do_something_very_complicated(
      something = "that",
      requires = many,
      arguments = "some of which may be long"
    )

    # we prefer this
    do_something_very_complicated(something = "that",
                                  requires = many,
                                  arguments = "some of which may be long")
    ```

    This results in less vertical and more horizontal spread of the code and better readability in pipes.

-   Usage of [magrittr’s compound assignment pipe-operator `%<>%`](https://magrittr.tidyverse.org/reference/compound.html) is desirable[^2].

-   Usage of [R’s right-hand assignment operator `->`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/assignOps.html) is not allowed[^3].

-   R source code is *not* split over several files as [suggested by the TSG](https://style.tidyverse.org/package-files.html) but instead is (as far as possible) kept in the single file [`Rmd/nocodb.Rmd`](https://gitlab.com/rpkg.dev/nocodb/-/tree/main/Rmd/nocodb.Rmd) which is well-structured thanks to its [Markdown support](#r-markdown-format).

As far as possible, these deviations from the TSG plus some additional restrictions are formally specified in [`pkgpurl::default_linters`](https://pkgpurl.rpkg.dev/reference/default_linters), which is (by default) used in [`pkgpurl::lint_rmd()`](https://pkgpurl.rpkg.dev/reference/lint_rmd), which in turn is the recommended way to lint this package.

---

[^1]: This naming convention as well as the very idea to leverage the R Markdown format to author R packages was originally proposed by Yihui Xie. See his excellent [blog post](https://yihui.name/rlp/) for more detailed information about the benefits of literate programming techniques and some practical examples. Note that using `pkgpurl::purl_rmd()` is a less cumbersome alternative to the Makefile approach outlined by him.

[^2]: The TSG [explicitly instructs to avoid this operator](https://style.tidyverse.org/pipes.html#assignment-2) – presumably because it’s relatively unknown and therefore might be confused with the forward pipe operator `%>%` when skimming code only briefly. I don’t consider this to be an actual issue since there aren’t many sensible usage patterns of `%>%` at the beginning of a pipe sequence inside a function – I can only think of creating side effects and relying on [R’s implicit return of the last evaluated expression](https://rdrr.io/r/base/function.html). Therefore – and because I really like the `%<>%` operator – it’s usage is welcome.

[^3]: The TSG [explicitly accepts `->` for assignments at the end of a pipe sequence](https://style.tidyverse.org/pipes.html#assignment-2) while Google’s R Style Guide [considers this bad practice](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.html#right-hand-assignment) because it “makes it harder to see in code where an object is defined”. I second the latter.

Commit message:

feat: huge amount of improvements:
- implement auth via e-mail and password
- add various new fns
- polish existing fns
- internal refactorings
- use `pkgdown.tpl`
- improve and extend doc

README.md, after:

# nocodb

<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/package=nocodb" class="pkgdown-release"><img src="https://r-pkg.org/badges/version/nocodb" alt="CRAN Status" /></a>

nocodb allows to work with NocoDB’s RESTful APIs from R. NocoDB is a web application that provides an intuitive spreadsheet-like front-end for relational databases, see https://nocodb.com.

## Documentation

[![Netlify Status](https://api.netlify.com/api/v1/badges/8780ea6d-ea71-4ddc-a8fe-be53e095a727/deploy-status)](https://app.netlify.com/sites/nocodb-rpkg-dev/deploys)

The documentation of this package is found [here](https://nocodb.rpkg.dev).

## Installation

To install the latest development version of nocodb, run the following in R:

``` r
if (!("remotes" %in% rownames(installed.packages()))) {
  install.packages(pkgs = "remotes",
                   repos = "https://cloud.r-project.org/")
}

remotes::install_gitlab(repo = "rpkg.dev/nocodb")
```

## Package configuration

Some of nocodb’s functionality is controlled via package-specific global configuration which can either be set via [R options](https://rdrr.io/r/base/options.html) or [environment variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable) (the former take precedence). This configuration includes:

::: table-wide
| **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | **R option**        | **Environment variable** | **Default value** |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------------|:------------------|
| [Hostname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hostname) of the NocoDB server to work with.                                                                                                                                                     | `nocodb.hostname`   | `R_NOCODB_HOSTNAME`      |                   |
| Title (name) of the NocoDB [base](https://docs.nocodb.com/category/bases) to work with.                                                                                                                                                   | `nocodb.base_title` | `R_NOCODB_BASE_TITLE`    |                   |
| E-mail address of the NocoDB user to authenticate with.                                                                                                                                                                                   | `nocodb.email`      | `R_NOCODB_EMAIL`         |                   |
| Password of the NocoDB user to authenticate with.                                                                                                                                                                                         | `nocodb.password`   | `R_NOCODB_PASSWORD`      |                   |
| [API token](https://docs.nocodb.com/account-settings/api-tokens/) belonging to the NocoDB user to work with. An alternative to `email` and `password`. Note that not all of NocoDB’s API endpoints support authentication via API tokens. | `nocodb.api_token`  | `R_NOCODB_API_TOKEN`     |                   |
:::

## Development

### R Markdown format

This package’s source code is written in the [R Markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/) file format to facilitate practices commonly referred to as [*literate programming*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming). It allows the actual code to be freely mixed with explanatory and supplementary information in expressive Markdown format instead of having to rely on [`#` comments](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-lang.html#Comments) only.

All the `.gen.R` suffixed R source code found under [`R/`](https://gitlab.com/rpkg.dev/nocodb/-/tree/main/R/) is generated from the respective R Markdown counterparts under [`Rmd/`](https://gitlab.com/rpkg.dev/nocodb/-/tree/main/Rmd/) using [`pkgpurl::purl_rmd()`](https://pkgpurl.rpkg.dev/dev/reference/purl_rmd.html)[^1]. Always make changes only to the `.Rmd` files – never the `.R` files – and then run `pkgpurl::purl_rmd()` to regenerate the R source files.

### Coding style

This package borrows a lot of the [Tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/) design philosophies. The R code adheres to the principles specified in the [Tidyverse Design Guide](https://principles.tidyverse.org/) wherever possible and is formatted according to the [Tidyverse Style Guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/) (TSG) with the following exceptions:

-   Line width is limited to **160 characters**, double the [limit proposed by the TSG](https://style.tidyverse.org/syntax.html#long-lines) (80 characters is ridiculously little given today’s high-resolution wide screen monitors).

    Furthermore, the preferred style for breaking long lines differs. Instead of wrapping directly after an expression’s opening bracket as [suggested by the TSG](https://style.tidyverse.org/syntax.html#long-lines), we prefer two fewer line breaks and indent subsequent lines within the expression by its opening bracket:

    ``` r
    # TSG proposes this
    do_something_very_complicated(
      something = "that",
      requires = many,
      arguments = "some of which may be long"
    )

    # we prefer this
    do_something_very_complicated(something = "that",
                                  requires = many,
                                  arguments = "some of which may be long")
    ```

    This results in less vertical and more horizontal spread of the code and better readability in pipes.

-   Usage of [magrittr’s compound assignment pipe-operator `%<>%`](https://magrittr.tidyverse.org/reference/compound.html) is desirable[^2].

-   Usage of [R’s right-hand assignment operator `->`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/assignOps.html) is not allowed[^3].

-   R source code is *not* split over several files as [suggested by the TSG](https://style.tidyverse.org/package-files.html) but instead is (as far as possible) kept in the single file [`Rmd/nocodb.Rmd`](https://gitlab.com/rpkg.dev/nocodb/-/tree/main/Rmd/nocodb.Rmd) which is well-structured thanks to its [Markdown support](#r-markdown-format).

As far as possible, these deviations from the TSG plus some additional restrictions are formally specified in [`pkgpurl::default_linters`](https://pkgpurl.rpkg.dev/reference/default_linters), which is (by default) used in [`pkgpurl::lint_rmd()`](https://pkgpurl.rpkg.dev/reference/lint_rmd), which in turn is the recommended way to lint this package.

---

[^1]: This naming convention as well as the very idea to leverage the R Markdown format to author R packages was originally proposed by Yihui Xie. See his excellent [blog post](https://yihui.name/rlp/) for more detailed information about the benefits of literate programming techniques and some practical examples. Note that using `pkgpurl::purl_rmd()` is a less cumbersome alternative to the Makefile approach outlined by him.

[^2]: The TSG [explicitly instructs to avoid this operator](https://style.tidyverse.org/pipes.html#assignment-2) – presumably because it’s relatively unknown and therefore might be confused with the forward pipe operator `%>%` when skimming code only briefly. I don’t consider this to be an actual issue since there aren’t many sensible usage patterns of `%>%` at the beginning of a pipe sequence inside a function – I can only think of creating side effects and relying on [R’s implicit return of the last evaluated expression](https://rdrr.io/r/base/function.html). Therefore – and because I really like the `%<>%` operator – it’s usage is welcome.

[^3]: The TSG [explicitly accepts `->` for assignments at the end of a pipe sequence](https://style.tidyverse.org/pipes.html#assignment-2) while Google’s R Style Guide [considers this bad practice](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.html#right-hand-assignment) because it “makes it harder to see in code where an object is defined”. I second the latter.
